\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename pending.info
@settitle Pending: Async content placeholders for Emacs
@documentencoding UTF-8
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual describes Pending v0.1.0, a library for marking buffer
regions whose content arrives asynchronously.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 John Wiegley.

Permission is granted under the terms of the BSD 3-Clause License;
see the @file{LICENSE.md} file in the source distribution for the
full license text.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Pending: (pending). Async content placeholders for Emacs.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Pending
@subtitle Async content placeholders for Emacs
@subtitle for version 0.1.0
@author John Wiegley
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Pending

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What Pending is and isn't.
* Installation::                Getting Pending into your Emacs.
* Quick start::                 Five minutes to your first placeholder.
* Concepts::                    Tokens, lighters, registry, indicators.
* Simple API::                  The everyday entry points.
* Rich API::                    The full keyword API.
* Indicator modes::             Spinner, percent, ETA, lighter.
* Integrations::                Recipes for common async backends.
* Interactive UI::              The list buffer and cancel-at-point.
* Mode-line lighter::           The clickable indicator.
* Customization::               Variables and faces.
* Hooks and callbacks::         Lifecycle wiring.
* Comparison::                  @code{org-pending} and prior art.
* Caveats::                     Known limitations.
* Roadmap::                     What's planned for v0.2.
* Development::                 Building and testing.
* License::                     Manual license.
* Index::
@end menu


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction
@cindex overview

Pending is a standalone Emacs Lisp library for marking buffer regions
whose content will arrive asynchronously.  It provides a colored
placeholder where some asynchronously computed text is going to
appear, optionally with a spinner or progress bar, and atomically
replaces it with the result when ready.

@example
Calling Claude  @U{280B} [@U{2588}@U{2588}@U{2588}@U{2588}@U{2588}@U{2588}@U{2588}@U{2588}@U{00B7}@U{00B7}@U{00B7}@U{00B7}@U{00B7}@U{00B7}@U{00B7}@U{00B7}] 47%
@end example

Common use cases:

@itemize @bullet
@item LLM streaming responses (@code{gptel}, @code{agent-shell}, your
own Claude/OpenAI client).
@item Long-running shell commands run via @code{make-process}.
@item Network fetches via @code{url-retrieve}.
@item Arbitrary callback-driven asynchronous work.
@end itemize

@cindex why pending
The library aims for four properties that make asynchronous insertion
pleasant for end users:

@table @strong
@item Visible async
Users see immediately @emph{where} the answer will land and
@emph{that} something is happening.  No silent wait while staring at
a static buffer.

@item Atomic resolution
The swap from placeholder to result is exactly one undo step.  No
torn intermediate states, no partial-edit history pollution.

@item Edit-survival
While pending, the placeholder text is read-only.  Surrounding edits
adjust the placeholder's markers automatically; if the user deletes
the region outright, the placeholder cancels itself rather than
resolving into deleted space.

@item Backend-agnostic
The library does not commit to any particular async pattern; it
provides a small primitive (token + atomic swap) that integrates with
@code{gptel}, @code{make-process}, @code{url-retrieve}, plain timers,
or your own callback-driven pattern.
@end table

A single global animation timer drives all in-flight placeholders, so
spinning N concurrent regions costs only N overlay decorations per
tick, not N timers.


@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex installation
@cindex requirements

Pending requires Emacs 27.1 or newer and has no third-party runtime
dependencies.

@section Via @code{package-vc-install}

@example
(package-vc-install
 '(pending :url "https://github.com/jwiegley/pending"))
@end example

To install from a local checkout:

@example
(package-vc-install-from-checkout "/path/to/pending" "pending")
@end example

@section Via @code{use-package}

@example
(use-package pending
  :vc (:url "https://github.com/jwiegley/pending")
  :commands (pending-make pending-region pending-insert
             pending-finish pending-cancel pending-list
             pending-demo)
  :config
  (global-pending-lighter-mode 1))
@end example

@section Manual

Drop @file{pending.el} somewhere on @code{load-path} and
@code{(require 'pending)}.


@node Quick start
@chapter Quick start
@cindex quick start

The simplest path is the positional API: mark a region or point as
pending, then atomically replace it when the answer arrives.

@section Mark a region for rewrite

@example
(let ((tok (pending-region (line-beginning-position)
                           (line-end-position)
                           "rewriting")))
  ;; @dots{} kick off async work @dots{}
  (pending-finish tok "the new text"))
@end example

@section Mark a single point for insertion

@example
(let ((tok (pending-insert (point) "Calling Claude")))
  (run-at-time 2 nil (lambda () (pending-finish tok "Hello!"))))
@end example

@section Cancel from point

Place the cursor on a placeholder and run @kbd{M-x
pending-cancel-at-point}.  The placeholder's overlay also binds
@kbd{RET} and @kbd{mouse-1} to the same command via
@code{pending-region-map}, so a single @kbd{RET} on the highlighted
region cancels the in-flight work.

@section Show the lighter mode

@example
M-x global-pending-lighter-mode
@end example

The mode-line gains a small @code{[N@U{23F3}~Ks]} summary while any
placeholders are active.  Clicking the lighter opens
@code{pending-list}.


@node Concepts
@chapter Concepts
@cindex concepts

@section Tokens
@cindex token
@cindex pending struct

Every constructor returns a @dfn{token} --- a @code{pending} struct
used as a handle for the placeholder.  Pass the token to
@code{pending-finish}, @code{pending-cancel}, @code{pending-update},
and friends to operate on the placeholder.

Tokens are valid until they reach a terminal state.  Operations on a
terminal token are no-ops with a @code{:debug} warning.

@cindex states, lifecycle
The lifecycle states are:

@table @code
@item :scheduled
The placeholder has been created but no work has begun (or the caller
has not yet sent any signal).

@item :running
The caller has indicated that work is in progress.  This state is
reserved for future use; current call-sites typically transition
directly from @code{:scheduled} to @code{:streaming} or to a terminal
state.

@item :streaming
At least one chunk has been delivered via
@code{pending-stream-insert}.  The end marker's insertion-type is
@code{t}, so subsequent chunks append at the end naturally.

@item :resolved
Terminal.  The placeholder's region has been replaced with the final
content.

@item :rejected
Terminal.  The placeholder failed; the region carries an error glyph
plus reason.

@item :cancelled
Terminal.  The user (or library) cancelled the placeholder; the
region carries a small cancelled glyph.

@item :expired
Terminal.  Reserved for future use.
@end table

@code{pending-active-p} returns non-nil for the first three states
(@code{:scheduled}, @code{:running}, @code{:streaming}); the others
are terminal.

@section The pending registry
@cindex registry
@cindex pending-alist

All active placeholders are recorded in a global registry.  Two
public functions surface it:

@table @code
@item pending-alist
Returns @code{((ID . STRUCT) @dots{})} for every registered
placeholder, including terminal ones still in transit.  Order is
unspecified; the alist is fresh and safe to mutate.

@item pending-list-active
Returns a list of structs in active states only.  Accepts optional
@code{BUFFER} and @code{GROUP} filters.
@end table

The registry is also the data source for @kbd{M-x pending-list} and
the mode-line lighter.

@section Lighter vs region highlight
@cindex lighter
@cindex highlight

The library distinguishes two visual treatments:

@table @strong
@item Region highlight
When the overlay covers existing buffer text (adopt mode
@code{pending-region BEG END STR} with @code{BEG < END}), the
overlay carries @code{pending-highlight} as its @code{face} property
so the user can see @emph{which} characters the asynchronous change
will rewrite.  In insert mode and zero-width adopt mode the overlay
has no face --- there is no pre-existing region to highlight.

@item Lighter
A small bold badge (face @code{pending-lighter}) attached to the
overlay's @code{before-string}.  This is the prominent visual marker
that draws the eye.
@end table

The simple API uses a static lighter (@code{:lighter} indicator).
The rich API can substitute an animated spinner, a determinate bar,
or an ETA bar in place of the static lighter.

The library NEVER applies a @code{face} text property to text it
inserts itself: labels, streamed chunks, and resolution / rejection
/ cancellation replacement text all land in the buffer as plain
text, so the surrounding font-lock and major-mode faces apply
normally.  Only the overlay (in adopt mode with a non-empty range)
and the overlay's @code{before-string} lighter /
@code{after-string} progress bar are faced.

@section Read-only protection
@cindex read-only
@cindex edit-survival

While a placeholder is active, its inserted text is read-only via
text properties:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{read-only t}
@item @code{front-sticky '(read-only)} so insertions just before the
placeholder are blocked.
@item @code{rear-nonsticky '(read-only)} so insertions just after it
are allowed.
@end itemize

The user can edit before and after the placeholder freely, but not
the placeholder body itself.  The library binds
@code{inhibit-read-only} during its own operations so internal swaps
still work.

In adopt mode (@code{pending-make} with explicit @code{:start} and
@code{:end}), the library does @emph{not} retroactively add
read-only properties --- the caller owns that text.

@section Auto-cancellation paths
@cindex auto-cancellation
@cindex region-deleted
@cindex buffer-killed
@cindex timed-out

Several edge conditions auto-cancel an in-flight placeholder so it
cannot strand state:

@table @strong
@item Region deletion
If the user deletes the entire placeholder region, the overlay
collapses to zero length and a @code{modification-hook} cancels with
reason @code{:region-deleted}.

@item Buffer kill
@code{kill-buffer-hook} iterates the buffer's pending registry and
cancels each with reason @code{:buffer-killed}.

@item Deadline
When @code{pending-make} is called with @code{:deadline N}, a one-shot
timer fires @code{pending-reject} with reason @code{:timed-out} if
the placeholder is still active after N seconds.

@item Process death
@code{pending-attach-process} wraps the process sentinel; if the
process dies non-cleanly (or cleanly without an explicit resolve),
the placeholder is rejected with a reason derived from
@code{process-status}.

@item Emacs exit
When @code{pending-confirm-on-emacs-exit} is non-nil and active
placeholders exist, @code{kill-emacs-query-functions} prompts before
exit.
@end table


@node Simple API
@chapter Simple API
@cindex simple API
@cindex positional API

The simple positional API is the recommended starting point.  Each
function returns a token; pass that token to
@code{pending-finish}/@code{pending-cancel} when ready.

@deffn Function pending-region beg-or-token &optional end str
@findex pending-region
Two call shapes are supported.

@strong{Constructor:} @code{(pending-region BEG END STR)}.  Mark the
region @code{[BEG, END]} in the current buffer as pending an
asynchronous change.  When @code{BEG < END}, the overlay covers
existing buffer text and carries @code{pending-highlight} as its
@code{face} property so the user can see which characters the
asynchronous change will rewrite (the underlying buffer text is
untouched --- only the overlay carries a face).  STR shows as a
lighter badge at BEG via the overlay's @code{before-string}, faced
with @code{pending-lighter}.  If BEG equals END, the overlay carries
no face; only the lighter shows.  Returns a TOKEN (a
@code{pending} struct) usable with @code{pending-finish},
@code{pending-cancel}, and @code{pending-goto}.

@strong{Accessor:} @code{(pending-region TOKEN)}.  Back-compat
accessor: return the live overlay object owned by TOKEN, or nil.
Equivalent to @code{(pending-ov TOKEN)}.

@example
(let ((tok (pending-region (region-beginning) (region-end)
                           "summarising")))
  (gptel-request (buffer-substring (region-beginning) (region-end))
   :callback (lambda (text _) (pending-finish tok text))))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-insert pos str
@findex pending-insert
Mark POS as pending insertion of asynchronously-computed text.  Shows
STR as a lighter badge at POS.  No region is highlighted (BEG = END).
Returns a token.  When eventually resolved with text via
@code{pending-finish}, the text is inserted at POS.

@example
(pending-insert (point) "fetching weather")
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-finish token text
@findex pending-finish
Atomically replace TOKEN's region with TEXT.  Transition to
@code{:resolved}.  Returns t on success, nil if TOKEN was already in
a terminal state.

The replacement happens inside an @code{atomic-change-group}, so undo
sees one step.  @code{inhibit-read-only} and
@code{inhibit-modification-hooks} are bound during the swap.  Side
effects: removes the overlay, clears markers, unregisters the token,
cancels any deadline timer, and runs the @code{:on-resolve} callback
once (errors there are caught and warned).

@example
(pending-finish tok "Hello, world!")
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-cancel p &optional reason
@findex pending-cancel
Cancel P, optionally with REASON (default @code{:cancelled-by-user}).
Calls P's @code{:on-cancel} callback @emph{first}, so the caller can
abort underlying work (e.g. kill a process).  Then transitions P to
@code{:cancelled} and replaces the region with a small cancelled
glyph (@samp{@U{2717} REASON}).  The inserted glyph is plain text
--- the library never adds a @code{face} property to text it inserts
itself; surrounding font-lock applies normally.

The @code{:on-cancel} callback is wrapped in @code{condition-case};
a buggy callback (or one that signals @code{quit}) does not break
the cancel pipeline.

@example
(pending-cancel tok)               ; cancelled-by-user
(pending-cancel tok :timed-out)    ; explicit reason
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Command pending-goto token
@findex pending-goto
Move point to TOKEN's start position.  Switches to TOKEN's buffer if
not already current.  Signals a @code{user-error} if the buffer is
dead.

Interactively, prompts via @code{completing-read} over the registered
placeholders.

@example
M-x pending-goto RET <pick from list> RET
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Command pending-list
@findex pending-list
Display all registered pending placeholders in a tabulated-list
buffer.  @xref{Interactive UI}, for the full description.
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-alist
@findex pending-alist
Return an alist snapshot @code{((ID . STRUCT) @dots{})} of all
currently registered pending placeholders.  Order is unspecified.
This is a fresh list; mutating it does not affect the registry.

@example
(length (pending-alist))                                 ; how many
(mapcar (lambda (cell) (pending-label (cdr cell)))       ; all labels
        (pending-alist))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Command pending-cancel-at-point
@findex pending-cancel-at-point
Cancel the pending placeholder at point.  Signals a @code{user-error}
if no placeholder covers point.  Bound to @kbd{RET} and @kbd{mouse-1}
over a placeholder by @code{pending-region-map}.
@end deffn


@node Rich API
@chapter Rich API
@cindex rich API
@cindex pending-make

The rich keyword API provides full control: streaming, animation,
ETA bars, deadlines, and process attachment.

@deffn Function pending-make buffer &key label start end indicator @
deadline eta percent face spinner-style on-cancel on-resolve group
@findex pending-make
The full constructor.  Inserts (or adopts) a placeholder in BUFFER.
Returns the new @code{pending} struct.

Insertion modes:

@table @strong
@item Insert mode
If both START and END are nil, insert a new placeholder at point in
BUFFER.  The inserted label text is propertized read-only.

@item Adopt mode
If both START and END are non-nil (positions or markers), adopt the
existing region @code{[START, END]}; do not insert text.  Adopt mode
does NOT retroactively add read-only properties to the existing text;
the caller owns that text.
@end table

It is an error to supply only one of START or END.

@multitable @columnfractions .22 .78
@headitem Keyword @tab Meaning
@item @code{:label}
@tab Short string shown inside the placeholder.  Default
@samp{Pending}.

@item @code{:start} @code{:end}
@tab Adopt mode endpoints (positions or markers).  Both or neither.

@item @code{:indicator}
@tab @code{:spinner} (default), @code{:percent}, @code{:eta}, or
@code{:lighter} (static badge).

@item @code{:percent}
@tab Initial fraction in @code{[0.0, 1.0]} for @code{:percent} mode.

@item @code{:eta}
@tab Estimated total seconds for @code{:eta} mode.

@item @code{:deadline}
@tab Wall-clock seconds until auto-rejection with reason
@code{:timed-out}.

@item @code{:face}
@tab Override @code{pending-face} for the OVERLAY's @code{face}
property in adopt mode (BEG < END only).  Inserted text is never
faced by the library.

@item @code{:spinner-style}
@tab Key into @code{pending-spinner-styles}.

@item @code{:on-cancel}
@tab Function @code{(P)} called @emph{before} the cancellation
pipeline.  Abort underlying work here.

@item @code{:on-resolve}
@tab Function @code{(P)} called once on transition to any terminal
state.

@item @code{:group}
@tab Symbol for filtering via @code{pending-list-active}.
@end multitable

Side effects: inserts placeholder text (insert mode), creates and
adopts an overlay, registers the struct, optionally schedules the
deadline timer, and installs the buffer-kill hook locally.  Signals
@code{pending-error} on invalid arguments or a dead/read-only buffer.

@example
(pending-make (current-buffer)
              :label "Calling Claude"
              :indicator :spinner
              :on-cancel (lambda (_) (gptel-abort)))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-update p &key label percent eta indicator
@findex pending-update
Mutate slots mid-flight without changing state.  Useful when the
caller learns more about progress --- e.g. switch from @code{:spinner}
to @code{:percent} once the total work size is known.

Clears the spinner-glyph render cache so any indicator/style changes
apply on the next tick.  No-op (with debug warning) if P is in a
terminal state.

@example
(pending-update tok :percent 0.42)
(pending-update tok :indicator :eta :eta 10.0)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-stream-insert p chunk
@findex pending-stream-insert
Append CHUNK (a string) to P's region.  The spinner / progress
indicator stays visible.

On the first chunk (when P is @code{:scheduled} or @code{:running})
the loading-label content is deleted and replaced by CHUNK, the end
marker's insertion-type is flipped to t, and the status transitions
to @code{:streaming}.  Subsequent chunks append at the end marker,
which advances with the insert because of its insertion-type.

Streamed text gets the same read-only properties as the initial
label, but no @code{face} property: the library never faces text
it inserts itself, so the buffer's normal font-lock applies.  The
library binds @code{inhibit-read-only} and
@code{inhibit-modification-hooks} so its own inserts do not retrigger
the cancel-on-collapse hook.

This does NOT finalize.  The caller must follow up with
@code{pending-stream-finish}, @code{pending-reject}, or
@code{pending-cancel}.

If P is already terminal, this is a no-op (debug warning); the chunk
is dropped.  Signals @code{wrong-type-argument} if CHUNK is not a
string; an empty string is a no-op.

@example
(pending-stream-insert tok "Once upon a time, ")
(pending-stream-insert tok "in a faraway land@dots{}")
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-stream-finish p
@findex pending-stream-finish
Finalize a streamed placeholder.  Transitions P from
@code{:streaming} to @code{:resolved}.  Locks the end marker, strips
read-only properties from the streamed region (so the resolved text
becomes editable), removes the overlay's animated decorations,
deletes the overlay, unregisters P, and fires its @code{:on-resolve}
callback.

If P is @code{:scheduled} or @code{:running} (no chunks were ever
streamed), behaves like @code{(pending-finish P "")}.  If P is
already terminal, a no-op with debug warning.

@example
(pending-stream-finish tok)
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-reject p reason &optional replacement-text
@findex pending-reject
Mark P as failed with REASON and replace its region.  REASON should
be a string or a keyword/symbol describing the failure.
REPLACEMENT-TEXT defaults to a glyph plus the reason.  The inserted
text is plain --- the library never adds a @code{face} property to
text it inserts itself; surrounding font-lock applies normally.

Side effects mirror @code{pending-finish} (removes overlay, clears
markers, unregisters, cancels timer, runs @code{:on-resolve}).

@example
(pending-reject tok "API rate limit exceeded")
(pending-reject tok :network-down "Try again later.")
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-attach-process p process
@findex pending-attach-process
Wire PROCESS so its death rejects P appropriately.  The process's
existing sentinel, if any, is preserved: it runs first, then a
wrapper inspects @code{process-status} and calls @code{pending-reject}
on non-clean exit.  The reason is derived from the live process
status, which is robust against localized event strings.

Behaviour by status:

@table @code
@item exit @r{(code 0)}
If P is still active, reject with @samp{process exited without
resolving}.

@item exit @r{(non-zero)}
Reject with @samp{process: exited with code N}.

@item signal
Reject with @samp{process: killed (signal N)}.

@item failed
Reject with @samp{process: failed}.

@item closed
Reject with @samp{process: connection closed}.

@item run / open / stop / listen / connect
No-op; the placeholder remains active.
@end table

If multiple processes are attached over P's lifetime, the LAST
attach wins for the @code{attached-process} slot, but each prior
process's wrapper still chains through.  A stale process exit will
still flow into @code{pending-reject}, which is a no-op once P is
terminal because of the single-resolution guard.

@example
(let ((proc (start-process "build" nil "make")))
  (pending-attach-process tok proc))
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-active-p p
@findex pending-active-p
Return non-nil if P is in an active (non-terminal) lifecycle state.
The active states are @code{:scheduled}, @code{:running}, and
@code{:streaming}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-status p
@findex pending-status
Return P's current status keyword.
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-at &optional pos buffer
@findex pending-at
Return the pending struct at POS in BUFFER, or nil if none.  POS
defaults to point; BUFFER defaults to the current buffer.  Searches
the overlays at POS for one carrying a @code{pending} property.
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-list-active &optional buffer group
@findex pending-list-active
Return the list of active pending structs.  Optional BUFFER and
GROUP filter the result.  Order within the result is unspecified.
@end deffn


@node Indicator modes
@chapter Indicator modes
@cindex indicator
@cindex spinner
@cindex progress bar
@cindex ETA

Choose a visual via the @code{:indicator} keyword to
@code{pending-make}.  The simple positional API always uses
@code{:lighter}; the rich API defaults to @code{:spinner}.

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .35 .50
@headitem Indicator @tab Visual @tab Use when
@item @code{:spinner}
@tab Animated glyph + label (default).
@tab Duration unknown but the library should look alive.

@item @code{:percent}
@tab Spinner glyph + bar + percent.
@tab Caller can supply a fraction in @code{[0.0, 1.0]}.

@item @code{:eta}
@tab Spinner glyph + bar + remaining-seconds estimate.
@tab Caller has a rough guess at total wall-clock seconds.

@item @code{:lighter}
@tab Static badge.  No animation.
@tab Visual marker only; no progress to convey.
@end multitable

@cindex piecewise asymptote
The @code{:eta} indicator uses a piecewise-asymptotic formula:

@itemize @bullet
@item @math{0 \le ratio \le 0.8} --- linear: fraction = ratio.
@item @math{0.8 < ratio \le 1.0} --- linear, slope 0.75: hits 0.95 at
ratio = 1.
@item @math{ratio > 1.0} --- asymptote: @math{1 - 0.05 e^{-(ratio-1)}}.
@end itemize

This avoids the ``100% but still working'' effect that bothers users.
The bar saturates toward (but never reaches) 100% past the deadline,
so callers can rely on ``not done until I say so.''

@cindex spinner styles
Spinner styles ship with: @code{dots-1}, @code{dots-2}, @code{line},
@code{arc}, @code{clock}.  Add your own:

@example
(add-to-list 'pending-spinner-styles
             '(my-style . ["a" "b" "c"]))
@end example


@node Integrations
@chapter Integrations
@cindex integrations
@cindex recipes

Each recipe below is a copy-pasteable function.  Adapt the prompts,
commands, and URLs to taste.

@section gptel --- streaming response
@cindex gptel

@example
(defun my/gptel-pending-stream (prompt)
  "Send PROMPT via gptel; stream the response into a pending placeholder."
  (let ((p (pending-make (current-buffer)
                         :label "Calling Claude"
                         :indicator :spinner
                         :on-cancel (lambda (_)
                                      (gptel-abort (current-buffer))))))
    (gptel-request
     prompt
     :stream t
     :position (pending-end p)
     :callback (lambda (chunk info)
                 (cond
                  ((stringp chunk) (pending-stream-insert p chunk))
                  ((plist-get info :error)
                   (pending-reject p (plist-get info :error)))
                  (t (pending-stream-finish p)))))
    p))
@end example

@section gptel --- non-streaming response

@example
(defun my/gptel-pending-call (prompt)
  "Send PROMPT via gptel; replace the pending placeholder with the response."
  (let ((p (pending-insert (point) "Calling Claude")))
    (gptel-request
     prompt
     :callback (lambda (response info)
                 (cond
                  ((stringp response) (pending-finish p response))
                  ((plist-get info :error)
                   (pending-reject p (plist-get info :error)))
                  (t (pending-cancel p)))))
    p))
@end example

@section @code{make-process} --- capture stdout
@cindex make-process

@example
(defun my/run-shell-pending (cmd)
  "Run CMD in a shell; stream stdout into a pending placeholder."
  (let* ((p (pending-make (current-buffer)
                          :label (format "Running: %s" cmd)
                          :indicator :spinner))
         (proc (make-process
                :name "shell-pending"
                :buffer nil
                :command (list shell-file-name "-c" cmd)
                :filter (lambda (_proc out)
                          (pending-stream-insert p out))
                :sentinel (lambda (_proc event)
                            (if (string-prefix-p "finished" event)
                                (pending-stream-finish p)
                              (pending-reject p (string-trim event)))))))
    (pending-attach-process p proc)
    (setf (pending-on-cancel p) (lambda (_) (delete-process proc)))
    p))
@end example

@section @code{url-retrieve} --- async fetch
@cindex url-retrieve

@example
(defun my/fetch-pending (url)
  "GET URL; replace the pending placeholder with its body."
  (let ((p (pending-make (current-buffer)
                         :label (format "Fetching %s" url)
                         :indicator :eta :eta 5.0
                         :deadline 60)))
    (url-retrieve
     url
     (lambda (status)
       (cond
        ((plist-get status :error)
         (pending-reject p (format "%S" (plist-get status :error))))
        (t
         (goto-char (point-min))
         (re-search-forward "^$" nil t)
         (pending-finish p (buffer-substring (point) (point-max)))))))
    p))
@end example

@section Pure-delay timer

A useful template for tests and demos:

@example
(defun my/delay-pending (seconds text)
  "Show a pending placeholder; replace with TEXT after SECONDS."
  (let ((p (pending-insert (point) (format "wait %ds" seconds))))
    (run-at-time seconds nil
                 (lambda ()
                   (when (pending-active-p p)
                     (pending-finish p text))))
    p))
@end example

@section Generic callback-driven async

@example
(defun my/with-pending (label callback)
  "Show a pending placeholder labelled LABEL.
CALLBACK is called with the token; it must arrange to call
`pending-finish' or `pending-reject' on the token."
  (let ((p (pending-make (current-buffer)
                         :label label
                         :indicator :spinner)))
    (funcall callback p)
    p))
@end example


@node Interactive UI
@chapter Interactive UI
@cindex interactive UI
@cindex pending list

@section The @code{*Pending*} buffer
@cindex Pending buffer

@kbd{M-x pending-list} opens a tabulated-list view with one row per
registered placeholder.

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .12 .73
@headitem Column @tab Width @tab Meaning
@item ID      @tab 16 @tab Generated symbol name (@code{pending-N}).
@item Buffer  @tab 24 @tab Buffer hosting the placeholder.
@item Label   @tab 30 @tab The label string, truncated.
@item Status  @tab 12 @tab Status keyword, e.g. @code{:streaming}.
@item Elapsed @tab  8 @tab Wall-clock seconds since creation.
@item ETA     @tab  8 @tab The placeholder's ETA, or @samp{-}.
@item Group   @tab 10 @tab The placeholder's group symbol, or @samp{-}.
@end multitable

Bindings:

@table @kbd
@item g
@findex pending-list-refresh
Re-read the registry.
@item RET
@findex pending-list-jump
Pop to the placeholder's buffer.
@item c
@findex pending-list-cancel
Cancel; reason @code{:cancelled-from-list}.
@item q
Bury the buffer.
@end table

The list does not auto-refresh in v0.1; press @kbd{g} to update.
Auto-refresh is on the v0.2 roadmap.

@section Cancel from point

@kbd{M-x pending-cancel-at-point} cancels the placeholder under
point.  The library installs an overlay keymap on every placeholder
binding @kbd{RET} and @kbd{mouse-1} to the same command:

@defvr Variable pending-region-map
@vindex pending-region-map
Keymap installed on placeholder overlays.  Bound to @kbd{RET} and
@kbd{mouse-1} for @code{pending-cancel-at-point}.
@end defvr

@section The demo
@cindex demo

@deffn Command pending-demo
@findex pending-demo
Open @code{*pending-demo*} with three concurrent placeholders
demonstrating the spinner, ETA, and percent indicators.  They resolve
themselves over about 12 seconds.  Useful for visual inspection of
the library on the current theme.
@end deffn


@node Mode-line lighter
@chapter Mode-line lighter
@cindex mode-line lighter
@cindex global-pending-lighter-mode

@deffn Command global-pending-lighter-mode
@findex global-pending-lighter-mode
A global minor mode that appends a small construct to
@code{global-mode-string}.  When enabled, the mode-line displays:

@example
 [3@U{23F3}~5s]
@end example

Meaning: @emph{3 active placeholders; the smallest remaining ETA
across them is approximately 5 seconds}.  When no placeholder has an
ETA in the future, the trailing tilde-segment is omitted:
@code{[3@U{23F3}]}.  When no placeholders are active, the lighter is
hidden entirely.

The lighter is propertized with @code{pending-spinner-face}, carries
a help-echo tooltip, and binds @kbd{mouse-1} to @code{pending-list}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function pending-mode-line-string
@findex pending-mode-line-string
Compute the lighter string.  Return a propertized string or nil.
Suitable for incorporating manually into a custom mode-line construct
without enabling the global mode.
@end deffn


@node Customization
@chapter Customization
@cindex customization

@section User options

@defopt pending-fps
Animation rate of pending placeholders, in frames per second.  Used
by the single global animation timer that walks the registry on each
tick.  A value of 10 (default) is the conventional sweet spot for
in-buffer spinners --- fast enough to read as motion, slow enough not
to hammer redisplay.
@end defopt

@defopt pending-bar-width
Width of the textual progress bar, in cells.  Default 16.  Used by
the @code{:percent} and @code{:eta} indicators.
@end defopt

@defopt pending-default-spinner-style
Default key into @code{pending-spinner-styles} for new placeholders.
Default @code{'dots-1}.  Per-placeholder override available via the
@code{:spinner-style} keyword to @code{pending-make}.
@end defopt

@defopt pending-spinner-styles
Alist mapping spinner style symbols to vectors of frame strings.
Built-in styles: @code{dots-1}, @code{dots-2}, @code{line},
@code{arc}, @code{clock}.  Add your own with @code{add-to-list}.
@end defopt

@defopt pending-bar-style
Bar character set: @code{eighths} (Unicode eighth-block characters,
default) or @code{ascii} (ASCII fallback for terminals where Unicode
block elements don't render).
@end defopt

@defopt pending-bar-family
Font family used for the progress bar segment, or nil.  When non-nil,
the bar text is rendered in this family so that proportional buffer
faces do not break alignment.  When nil, the bar inherits the
surrounding face --- variable-pitch users may then see misalignment.
@end defopt

@defopt pending-allow-read-only
If non-nil, allow placement of placeholders in read-only buffers.
By default @code{pending-make} refuses to operate on a buffer where
@code{buffer-read-only} is non-nil; setting this to t binds
@code{inhibit-read-only} during insertion and resolution.  Useful for
hosts like @code{compilation-mode} or chat buffers that flip
read-only on the caller's behalf.
@end defopt

@defopt pending-label-max-width
Maximum width, in characters, of a placeholder's visible label.
Default 60.  Labels longer than this are truncated with an ellipsis;
the full label remains available in the placeholder's tooltip.
@end defopt

@defopt pending-confirm-on-emacs-exit
If non-nil, prompt before exiting Emacs while placeholders are
active.  Implemented via @code{pending--kill-emacs-query}, which is
registered on @code{kill-emacs-query-functions} at load time.  When
nil (the default) the query function returns t unconditionally and
the exit is not blocked.
@end defopt

@section Faces
@cindex faces

The library never adds a @code{face} text property to text it
inserts itself.  Faces are applied only to overlay properties ---
the overlay's @code{face} (when adopting an existing region with
@code{BEG < END}), the overlay's @code{before-string} lighter, and
the overlay's @code{after-string} progress bar.  This means the
surrounding buffer's font-lock is never disturbed by the
placeholder library.

@deffn Face pending-highlight
@findex pending-highlight
The overlay @code{face} for adopt-mode placeholders that cover
existing buffer text (@code{BEG < END}).  In insert mode and
zero-width adopt mode the overlay carries no face.  The library
never applies this (or any) face as a text property to text it
inserts itself.
@end deffn

@deffn Face pending-lighter
@findex pending-lighter
Static badge shown at BEG of a pending overlay.  Bold white-on-red
by default for high visibility.  The lighter is a visual badge
attached to the overlay's @code{before-string}, not text in the
buffer.
@end deffn

@deffn Face pending-face
@findex pending-face
Default value of @code{pending-make}'s @code{:face} keyword.
Inherits from @code{pending-highlight}.  Used as the overlay's
@code{face} property only when the overlay covers existing buffer
text (adopt mode with a non-empty range).
@end deffn

@deffn Face pending-spinner-face
@findex pending-spinner-face
The before-string spinner glyph.
@end deffn

@deffn Face pending-progress-face
@findex pending-progress-face
The after-string progress bar and ETA text.  Apply
@code{pending-bar-family} on top of this face when set, to keep
alignment under variable-pitch buffer faces.
@end deffn

@deffn Face pending-error-face
@findex pending-error-face
Retained for backward compatibility and customization.  As of
v0.1.0 the library does not face inserted text --- @code{pending-reject}
inserts plain buffer text and surrounding font-lock applies.
@end deffn

@deffn Face pending-cancelled-face
@findex pending-cancelled-face
Retained for backward compatibility and customization.  As of
v0.1.0 the library does not face inserted text --- @code{pending-cancel}
inserts plain buffer text and surrounding font-lock applies.
@end deffn


@node Hooks and callbacks
@chapter Hooks and lifecycle callbacks
@cindex hooks
@cindex callbacks

@section Per-placeholder callbacks

@subsection @code{:on-cancel}
@cindex on-cancel

Called @emph{before} the cancellation pipeline runs.  Abort
underlying work here --- kill processes, abort gptel requests, cancel
timers.

@example
(pending-make (current-buffer)
              :label "Calling Claude"
              :on-cancel (lambda (p)
                           (gptel-abort (pending-buffer p))))
@end example

If @code{:on-cancel} signals an error or @code{quit}, the cancel
pipeline catches it and proceeds; the placeholder cannot get
stranded.

@subsection @code{:on-resolve}
@cindex on-resolve

Called @emph{once} on transition to any terminal state
(@code{:resolved}, @code{:rejected}, @code{:cancelled},
@code{:expired}).  Inspect @code{(pending-status p)} inside the
callback to differentiate.

@example
(pending-make (current-buffer)
              :label "Calling Claude"
              :on-resolve (lambda (p)
                            (message "Done: %s -> %s"
                                     (pending-label p)
                                     (pending-status p))))
@end example

@section Global hooks installed by the library

@table @code
@item kill-buffer-hook
Buffer-local.  Cancels every placeholder in the buffer being killed
with reason @code{:buffer-killed}.

@item kill-emacs-query-functions
When @code{pending-confirm-on-emacs-exit} is non-nil, prompts before
exit if active placeholders exist.

@item window-buffer-change-functions
Re-arms the parked animation timer when a placeholder's buffer
becomes visible.
@end table

@code{pending-unload-function} cleans up the timer and removes the
global hooks on @code{unload-feature}.

@section Errors
@cindex errors

@deffn Error pending-error
The library's own error symbol.  Signalled by @code{pending-make} for
invalid arguments (dead buffer, read-only buffer when not allowed,
mismatched START/END, out-of-bounds positions).
@end deffn


@node Comparison
@chapter Comparison with @code{org-pending}
@cindex org-pending
@cindex comparison

Bruno Barbier's @code{org-pending} is a closely related upstream Org
patch (branch @code{bba-pending-contents}) that nevertheless declares
itself independent of Org mode.  It solves a similar problem from a
different angle.

@multitable @columnfractions .20 .40 .40
@headitem Aspect @tab @code{org-pending} @tab @code{pending}
@item Distribution
@tab Org-mode patch
@tab Standalone library

@item Org dependency
@tab None (but namespace and prefix imply Org)
@tab None

@item State machine
@tab @code{:scheduled @U{2192} :pending @U{2192} :success/:failure}
@tab Adds @code{:running}, @code{:streaming}, @code{:cancelled},
@code{:expired}

@item Animation
@tab Static Unicode glyph
@tab Animated spinner (10 fps, single global timer)

@item Progress bar
@tab Single line of text in @code{after-string}
@tab Eighth-block Unicode bar (or ASCII fallback)

@item Streaming
@tab Message-passing via @code{org-pending-send-update}
@tab First-class @code{pending-stream-insert} /
@code{-stream-finish}

@item Description UI
@tab @code{*Region Lock*} describe buffer
@tab Tabulated list (deferred describe-buffer)

@item Indirect buffers
@tab Read-only projection
@tab Not yet --- single-buffer scope

@item Kill-emacs query
@tab Built in
@tab Same hook, gated by @code{pending-confirm-on-emacs-exit}
@end multitable

The two libraries can coexist.  Pick whichever suits your caller: if
you live in Org and want minimal animation, prefer
@code{org-pending}; if you want streaming and progress visualization
out of the box, prefer @code{pending}.


@node Caveats
@chapter Limitations and caveats
@cindex caveats
@cindex limitations

@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{~50 placeholders per buffer guideline.}  Each
placeholder is an overlay, and overlays have O(n) scan cost for
some buffer operations.  Keep concurrent counts modest.

@item @strong{Variable-pitch alignment.}  The @code{:percent} and
@code{:eta} bars assume a monospaced cell width.  Under
variable-pitch buffer faces, the bar may look ragged.  Set
@code{pending-bar-family} to a fixed-pitch family to compensate.

@item @strong{No SVG spinner in v0.1.}  Spinners are text glyphs
only.  SVG spinners (and a fringe-bitmap indicator) are on the v0.2
roadmap.

@item @strong{Manual refresh of @code{*Pending*} list.}  Press
@kbd{g} to update; the list does not auto-refresh on registry
mutation in v0.1.

@item @strong{Single-buffer scope.}  A placeholder's overlay and
read-only text properties live in one buffer.  There is no
projection across indirect buffers in v0.1; @code{org-pending}-style
indirect-buffer projection is on the roadmap.

@item @strong{No cross-buffer multi-region pending.}  A single
pending struct represents one contiguous region in one buffer.
Coordinate multiple related placeholders via the @code{:group}
keyword and @code{pending-list-active}.
@end itemize


@node Roadmap
@chapter Roadmap
@cindex roadmap
@cindex v0.2

Items deferred past the v0.1.0 tag:

@itemize @bullet
@item Auto-refresh of @code{*Pending*} on registry mutation.
@item Pulse-on-resolve flash via @code{pulse.el}.
@item @code{pending-as-promise} adapter for @code{aio} users.
@item SVG spinner for graphical frames.
@item Fringe bitmap indicator beside the placeholder.
@item @code{*Region Lock*}-style description buffer for a single
placeholder.
@item Indirect-buffer projection of read-only properties.
@item @code{pending-test--with-mocked-time} macro for deterministic
fast-forward testing.
@end itemize


@node Development
@chapter Development
@cindex development
@cindex testing

@section Building

This package uses @uref{https://github.com/emacs-eask/cli, Eask} for
build automation, with a Makefile wrapper.

@example
# Install dependencies
eask install-deps

# Compile (warning-free)
eask compile

# Run tests (72 ERT tests as of v0.1.0)
eask test ert pending-test.el

# All-in-one via Make
make compile
make test
make docs       # build doc/pending.info
make clean
@end example

@section Generating the manual

The Texinfo source lives at @file{doc/pending.texi}; the built
@file{pending.info} ships in the package.

@example
make info       # build doc/pending.info
make html       # build doc/pending.html (preview)
make clean-docs
@end example

@section Interactive development

@example
;; Reload the library after editing
(unload-feature 'pending t)
(load-file "pending.el")

;; Run a single test
M-x ert RET pending-test/scheduled-to-resolved RET

;; Open the demo
M-x pending-demo
@end example

@section Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome via GitHub.  When filing
an issue, please include the Emacs version, whether you are running
graphical or terminal Emacs, steps to reproduce, and a backtrace if
applicable.

When sending a PR, please match the existing code style (lexical
binding, double-dash for internal symbols, comprehensive docstrings),
add ERT tests for new behaviour, ensure @code{eask compile} is
warning-free and @code{eask test} is green, and run @kbd{M-x
checkdoc} on touched files.


@node License
@appendix License

This manual is distributed under the BSD 3-Clause License, the same
license as the @file{pending} library itself.  See the
@file{LICENSE.md} file in the source distribution for the full
license text.


@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@bye
